**In the past, buildings often reflected the culture of a society but today all modern buildings look alike and cities throughout the world are becoming more and more similar. What do you think is the reason for this, and is it a good thing or a bad thing?**

Nowadays, people tend to build the same buildings all over the globe, yet in the past building used to be unique to each culture. In my opinion, this is happening because of the emerging trend of prioritizing simplicity and practicality over respecting the legacy of ancestors.

Mass production has brought globalisation and has been changing our culture. However, it is unknown whether this trend is positive or not. With manufacturing flourishing, it has become easier to build standardized things, and handmade crafts have begun to go extinct. Thus have led to cheaper goods and rise in standard of living, however, at the same time, the borders of different cultures have become more blurred. Nowadays, city dwellers can easily order food from around the world and purchase anything from a katana to a burqa on Amazon. The emerging trend of simplicity and cheap mass production have squeezed into architecture as well. It is much cheaper to use standard and proven building construction methods than to try to adapt them to local culture. However, city's infestation with these workhorse buildings can diminish its appeal to tourists. The latter can dramatically change financial ecosystem of place, decreasing the stream of money from tourism sector and enhance emigration trend.

In my opinion there must be a balance between universal cheap buildings and buildings unique to the place. It's an amazing feeling as a tourist to be able to admire authentic architecture. However, we should also consider those looking to buy affordable homes. I think having unique buildings in the historical city center and affordable, modern buildings in the suburbs can be a great compromise for any city.