Context managers allow you to allocate and release resources precisely when you want to. The most widely used example of context managers is the `with` statement.

```Python
with open(filename) as file:
	...

# No need to call close()
```

Method `__dell__` will be called if there are no pointers to the object.

*Typical uses of context managers include saving and restoring various kinds of global state, locking and unlocking resources, closing opened files, etc.*

# Implementing a Context Manager as a Class

This protocol is implemented using a pair of methods that allow user-defined classes to define a runtime context that is entered before the statement body is executed and exited when the statement ends:

```Python
def __enter__(self):
```

Enter the runtime context related to this object. The [`with`](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/compound_stmts.html#with) statement will bind this method’s return value to the target(s) specified in the `as` clause of the statement, if any.

```Python
def __exit__(self, exp_type, exp_value, exp_traceback):
	# exp_type - тип зафиксированного исключения или None
	# exp_value - объект зафиксированного исключения или None
	# exp_traceback - трассировка стэка зафиксированного исключения или None
```

Exit the runtime context and ***return a Boolean flag indicating if any exception that occurred should be suppressed***. If an exception occurred while executing the body of the [`with`](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/compound_stmts.html#with) statement, the arguments contain the exception type, value and traceback information. Otherwise, all three arguments are `None`.

***Exceptions that occur during execution of this method will replace any exception that occurred in the body of the `with` statement.***

***The exception passed in should never be reraised explicitly*** - instead, this ***method should return a false value*** to indicate that the method completed successfully and does not want to suppress the raised exception. This allows context management code to easily detect whether or not an [`__exit__()`](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#object.__exit__ "object.__exit__") method has actually failed.

```Python
class File:
    def __init__(self, file_name, method):
        self.file_obj = open(file_name, method)
        
    def __enter__(self):
        return self.file_obj
        
    def __exit__(self, type, value, traceback):
        self.file_obj.close()

with File('demo.txt', 'w') as opened_file:
    opened_file.write('Text')
```

1. The `with` statement stores the `__exit__` method of the `File` class.
2. It calls the `__enter__` method of the `File` class.
3. The `__enter__` method opens the file and returns it.
4. The opened file handle is passed to `opened_file`.
5. We write to the file using `.write()`.
6. The `with` statement calls the stored `__exit__` method.
7. The `__exit__` method closes the file.

Between the 4th and 6th step, if an exception occurs, Python passes the type, value and traceback of the exception to the `__exit__` method. It allows the `__exit__` method to decide how to close the file and if any further steps are required. In our case we are not paying any attention to them.

1. It passes the type, value and traceback of the error to the `__exit__` method.
2. It allows the `__exit__` method to handle the exception.
3. If `__exit__` returns `True` then the exception was gracefully handled.
4. If anything other than `True` is returned by the `__exit__` method then the exception is raised by the `with` statement.

# Implementing a Context Manager using contextlib

```Python
@contextlib
def context():
	session = Session()
	yield session

	try:
		session.commit()
	except Exception as e:
		session.rollback()
		raise e
	finally:
		session.close()
```

1. Python encounters the `yield` keyword. Due to this it creates a generator instead of a normal function.
2. Due to the decoration, contextmanager is called with the function name (`context`) as its argument.
3. The `contextmanager` decorator returns the generator wrapped by the `GeneratorContextManager` object.
4. The `GeneratorContextManager` is assigned to the `context` function. Therefore, when we later call the `context` function, we are actually calling the `GeneratorContextManager` object.
## contextlib.closing(thing)

Return a context manager that closes _thing_ upon completion of the block

```Python
from contextlib import closing
from urllib.request import urlopen

with closing(urlopen('https://www.python.org')) as page:
    for line in page:
        print(line)

# You can use code above without needing to explicitly close `page`. Even if an error occurs, `page.close()` will be called when the `with` block is exited.
```

is equivalent to:

```Python
from contextlib import contextmanager

@contextmanager
def closing(thing):
    try:
        yield thing
    finally:
        thing.close()
```

**contextlib.aclosing(_thing_)** - Return an async context manager that calls the `aclose()` method of _thing_ upon completion of the block.

## contextlib.suppress(_*exceptions_)

Return a context manager that suppresses any of the specified exceptions if they occur in the body of a `with` statement and then resumes execution with the first statement following the end of the `with` statement.

As with any other mechanism that completely suppresses exceptions, this context manager should be used only to cover very specific errors where silently continuing with program execution is known to be the right thing to do.

```Python
from contextlib import suppress

with suppress(FileNotFoundError):
    os.remove('somefile.tmp')
```

This code is equivalent to:

```Python
try:
    os.remove('somefile.tmp')
except FileNotFoundError:
    pass
```

## contextlib.redirect_stdout(_new_target_)

Context manager for temporarily redirecting [`sys.stdout`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys.html#sys.stdout "sys.stdout") to another file or file-like object.

```Python
with open('help.txt', 'w') as f:
    with redirect_stdout(f):
        help(pow)

with redirect_stdout(sys.stderr):
    help(pow)
```

Note that the global side effect on [`sys.stdout`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys.html#sys.stdout "sys.stdout") means that ***this context manager is not suitable for use in library code and most threaded applications***. It also has ***no effect on the output of subprocesses***. However, it is still a useful approach for many utility scripts.

**contextlib.redirect_stderr(_new_target_)** - similar to [`redirect_stdout()`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/contextlib.html#contextlib.redirect_stdout "contextlib.redirect_stdout") but redirecting [`sys.stderr`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/sys.html#sys.stderr "sys.stderr") to another file or file-like object.

## contextlib.nullcontext(_enter_result=None_)

Return a context manager that returns _enter_result_ from `__enter__`, but otherwise does nothing. It is intended to be used as a stand-in for an optional context manager, for example:

```Python
def myfunction(arg, ignore_exceptions=False):
    if ignore_exceptions:
        # Use suppress to ignore all exceptions.
        cm = contextlib.suppress(Exception)
    else:
        # Do not ignore any exceptions, cm has no effect.
        cm = contextlib.nullcontext()
    with cm:
        # Do something
```

An example using _enter_result_:

```Python
def process_file(file_or_path):
    if isinstance(file_or_path, str):
        # If string, open file
        cm = open(file_or_path)
    else:
        # Caller is responsible for closing file
        cm = nullcontext(file_or_path)

    with cm as file:
        # Perform processing on the file
```

It can also be used as a stand-in for [asynchronous context managers](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#async-context-managers).

# References:

1. [The Magic of Python Context Managers | by Martin Heinz | Towards Data Science](https://towardsdatascience.com/the-magic-of-python-context-managers-adb92ace1dd0)
2. [Context Managers and Python's with Statement – Real Python](https://realpython.com/python-with-statement/)
3. [Understanding Context Manager and its Syntastic Sugar](https://bjoernricks.github.io/posts/python/context-manager/ "Permalink to Understanding Context Manager and its Syntastic Sugar")