> WAL (Write-ahead log) or Redo log = in addition to updating pages in memory we also record the changes transactions make in an append log and we flush the log to disk when the transaction commits. We know flushing the log is going to be fast because the changes are much smaller than writing the full pages of data files and indexes. Moreover, we can safely leave the updated data pages in memory and not flush them to disk saving massive I/Os.

> Technically speaking we **_are_** consistent in memory because we do write to pages as we write the WAL and because we always read and write from and to memory first we get the latest and greatest.

WALs are not just smaller but also need fewer IOs. You have to write out a full sector to disk even if only one bit in it changed. ***WALs are append only*** and ***you only write to the end*** of the file. If you modify 4 rows that data may be in 4 sectors but may only need 1 WAL sector.

! The WAL can also be used for all sort of things like replications and backup and yes crash recovery. ([Debezium](https://debezium.io/))

And even if you write multiple WAL sectors they are sequential which is faster than doing random IOs. The advantage was massive with spindle drives but even on SSDs it is faster.

**Checkpointing** 

I issue a commit and my WAL is flushed successfully to disk and the database returns OK to the client (me) who issued the commit. So the WAL is updated. Then moments later the database start flushing my full pages to disk and now both data files and WAL are in sync on disk. We call this a checkpoint and the process that creates this checkpoint is checkpointing. The database will actually create a checkpoint record that says, I hereby declare at this moment in time, everything written to WAL on this moment is completely in SYNC with what we have on data files on disk.

> Checkpointing kicks in often by the database to make sure crash recovery are faster, but it is I/O intensive can you guess why? Well because of all the full pages writes that we must do.

**What if we crashed while writing the WAL?**

1. If you are in the middle of a transaction and the database crashed, we consider the transaction rolled-back by default, so WAL entries flushed by this uncommitted transaction will be discarded.
2. If we crashed midway through writing the WAL? That is also fine because we know exactly what transaction wrote those WAL changes and upon startup we will clean up the WAL records that belong to transactions that didn’t commit, we effectively roll it back.
3. If you were able to issue a COMMIT and the WAL entry for a transaction commit makes it to disk and the client gets a success, that transaction is considered committed even if we crashed right after.

=> Now we have data files on disk that are out of sync with what is in memory which is absolutely fine.

When the database restarts it finds the last checkpoint where the WAL and data files were completely in sync, and then after that point we in the WAL we know the data files are out of sync. So what the database does is take the WAL records after the checkpoint and start “redoing” the changes to the data files. Why is it called redo? because remember we already DID apply those changes to the pages in memory but we lost them. So we have to Redo them. That is why the WAL is also known as redo log, much better name than write-ahead log if you ask me.

That is why if we don’t run checkpoints often, in case of a crash, the database has to do much more work in recovery to redo all the changes to the files. You probably also have a large WAL which isn’t infinite, there is a fixed size WAL. 

When we do a checkpoint, we can technically safely purge the WAL because we know all changes are applied to the data files. But of course we can archive the WAL somewhere else for history purpses.

# Undo logs

I flush my WAL and commit, a checkpointer process kicks in and start flushing dirty pages to disk (dirty pages are pages in memory that have been written to) and midway through checkpointing database crashed! 

=> now is only half of the data pages updated and half of them are outdated with the WAL. The WAL only has changes, it has no clue what the original rows looked like. So for that we need another log to record the original state of the row before we made the change and that is the undo log.

Now with the undo log, the database first checks for transactions that started but didn’t commit and roll those back, any changes made by those transactions must be discarded from the WAL. Any changes that made it to the data files MUST be undone so we go back to consistent state where all rows in the data pages are trusted and committed. And finally we redo the WAL changes on those original pages to bring the pages back in sync with the WAL. 

# References:

1. !!! [Write Ahead Logs : But Why ??](https://medium.com/@vinciabhinav7/write-ahead-logs-but-why-494c3efd722d)
2. ~~[What happens when databases crash?](https://medium.com/@hnasr/what-happens-when-databases-crash-74540fd97ea9)~~
3. ~~[Why databases need Write-ahead log (WAL) — A deep dive](https://medium.com/@hnasr/what-is-wal-write-ahead-log-a-deep-dive-a2bc4dc91170)~~
4. ~~[Redo, Undo and WAL logs | The Backend Engineering Show](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uHvR7nOu5m4&list=PLQnljOFTspQXjD0HOzN7P2tgzu7scWpl2&index=95) (video)~~
5. [Write-Ahead Log — WAL](https://medium.com/nerd-for-tech/write-ahead-log-wal-c4c3327c6742)
6. [WAL в PostgreSQL: 1. Буферный кеш](https://habr.com/ru/company/postgrespro/blog/458186/)